WOBBLE

developed by:
Megan Bedell (mbedell@oddjob.uchicago.edu)
David Hogg (david.hogg@nyu.edu)

This document is a record of experiments I have tried while developing the code.

BACKGROUND

The goal of wobble is to derive precise radial velocities from HARPS data. The HARPS data reduction software (DRS)
automatically produces RVs which are derived by cross-correlation of the stellar spectrum with a binary mask. Each echelle
order has its own cross-correlation function (CCF), and the CCFs are co-added and fit with a Gaussian to produce a final RV.
It's not immediately obvious that this is the optimal way to get RVs, so I am experimenting with other methods. Additionally,
the HARPS DRS is proprietary and somewhat black-box in function, and an open-source alternative pipeline would be of great
value to near-future RV instruments.

Here is a summary of the data products returned by the HARPS pipeline for a single observation: 
- a CCF fits file: 161 x 73 array containing the cross-correlation functions for each of the 72 echelle orders, plus a
co-added CCF of all orders (apparently excluding the first order for unknown reasons). Order indices 57, 66, and 71 are blank. 
- an S1D fits file: 1-dimensional extracted spectrum which has been corrected for barycentric motion and rebinned to 0.1 Ang
steps. 
- an E2DS fits file: 4096 x 72 array containing the extracted order-by-order spectrum. 
- header information: Within the header of each FITS file is a lot more information, including wavelength solution
coefficients, spectral extraction parameters, order SNRs, barycentric correction values, and the RV drift solution from the
simultaneous reference source (if applicable). 
Also returned are flatfield, blaze, wavelength solution, and localization FITS frames (one per nightly calibration).

Some useful links to documentation:
https://www.eso.org/sci/facilities/lasilla/instruments/harps/doc/DRS.pdf
https://www.eso.org/sci/facilities/lasilla/instruments/harps/doc/manual/userman2_1.pdf

RE-FITTING CCFS

The first thing we tried was playing around with the extraction of RV values from the DRS-returned CCFs. The DRS fits a single
Gaussian to the co-added CCF, using all 161 points in the fit (which includes a considerable amount of ``continuum''). I tried
fitting Gaussians to each order's CCF and to the co-added CCF using varying numbers of points. Plotting the resulting standard
deviation among a time series of 48 measurements of an RV-quiet star as a function of how many points were used in the
Gaussian fit showed that using 20 points on either side of the minimum gives the lowest RV dispersion, so this was adopted for
all subsequent Gaussian fits to the CCFs.

We also tried doing a simple parabolic interpolation rather than a Gaussian fit. This gave worse results in terms of RV
dispersion regardless of how many CCF points were used in the fit.

The code to do these fitting experiments is currently located in read_harps.rv_parabola_fit, read_harps.rv_gaussian_fit.

COMBINING ORDERS

Some simple alternatives to adopting the RV of the co-added CCF are taking a (weighted or unweighted) mean or median of the
RVs for each echelle order. We tested these methods using the standard deviation of RVs for a time series of RV-quiet star
observations as a quality metric, as before. The results indicate that weighting by abs(amplitude of the Gaussian) works best,
followed by weighting by amplitude**2, and both work better than non-weighted statistics. However, using the co-added CCF
still performs marginally better than any other method we tried!

PCA/SVD

The general idea here is to treat each order's RV measurement as a separate time series and look for trends in this N_epoch x
69 order matrix of data. We tried implementing a simple singular value decomposition (SVD) algorithm on the order-by-order
RVs. We also tried a multi-parameter analysis on all of the Gaussian CCF fit parameters EXCEPT the RV (scaled by the variance
of the parameter).

This code is in the main wobble.py module, commits c. 05/26/2016.

OBSERVING CONDITIONS

This is a really simple/dumb test, but let's see if there are any correlations between the pipeline-derived RVs and various
measurements of observing conditions. We read airmass, SNR,* and seeing from the FITS headers and looked at Pearson
correlation coefficients with pipeline RV. Results: there is no relationship between RV and airmass, but there does appear to
be an anti-correlation between RV and SNR! Seeing was not measured on enough nights to get a robust result.

We also tried folding the RVs on a sidereal day period to check for potential issues with the barycentric correction, but that
seems fine.

* Note on the SNR: The pipeline actually delivers one SNR measurement per order. The SNR used here was the median of those.

WAVELENGTH SOLUTION

Assuming that some part of the RV ``jitter'' in the time series is due to instrumental effects, the wavelength solution's
behaviour in time should play an important role. The solution is printed in the pipeline-produced FITS headers in the form of
keywords that give polynomial coefficients for the wave(pixel_x, order#) fit. The polynomial has order given by keyword ``CAL
TH DEG LL'' (= 3 for all of the files I checked). Note that this solution is set by the beginning-of-night calibrations and
does not include any secondary adjustments from the simultaneous reference lamp.

Some observations: 
- The coefficients of the wavelength solution are strongly dependent on each other, e.g. the 0th and 1st
polynomial order coefficients are very very correlated. This makes sense because instrument resolution is a fixed quantity,
but the fact that the 2nd and 3rd polynomial order coefficients are anti-correlated with 0th order is less obvious to me.
- There is a correlation between pipeline RV and the 0th polynomial coefficient of the wavelength solution. Is this a
barycentric shift effect?